Logic is the formalized process of arguing about something.  It involves making statements that can be analyzed logically.  When acting mathematically, you work within a logical **calculus**, which provides some relationships that can appear in statements, and can be transformed in well-defined to derive new statements.

Logical calculi in general separate statements'' elements into the *logical* and *non-logical*, where the symbols that are included in the logical calculus are the *logical* part, and the *referents* of the statements, or the entities being reasoned about, are *non-logical*.  The logical portion is connected to the logic itself, while the non-logical portion is instead bound to a **domain of discourse**, which basically just defines what the logical statements are being applied to.  The same logical statement can often be applied to different domains, yielding different outcomes.

There are a variety of logical frameworks which use different rules for evaluating statements.  The most commonly used one of these is **classical logic**, in which statements are evaluated to determine their *truth value*.  A statement is either 'true' or 'false', and when statements are transformed and connected logically, it''s that truth value that propagates.

Another, quite different logical framework, is **intuitionistic logic**. Instead of evaluating their truth value, statements are considered according to their provability: A statement is either proven, disproven, or neither (yet).  The notion of truth value is still present (a proven statement is true, and a disproven statement is false), but it''s a derived concept; the logical operations are described by provability, and 'proven-ness' is what propagates through the system of logical statements.

These two logical approaches result in mathematical systems that are fundamentally different from one another (though most of the derived qualities and practical applications of them are the same).  This book targets the intuitionistic approach, as it is the considerably less written-about flavour, and because it has some significant advantages in thought.  I will make nods toward classical mathematics throughout, however, for clarity''s sake and also to highlight the ways in which the systems differ from one another.

Here are some axioms governing logical statements in both classical and intuitionistic logic:
- **law of identity**: 'Given an entity A, A = A,' or equivalently, the Cartesian 'I am; I exist'.  This is pretty much as self-evident as a statement can be, but stating it explicitly can be important (such as when teaching a computer to reason logically).
- **law of non-contradiction**: Two contradictory statements cannot both be true.  This is the fundamental rule that allows  for 'proof by contradiction', the art of assuming the opposite of the thing you want to prove and demonstrating that it is impossible.  Some logical frameworks, such as paradox-inclusive logic, incorporate contradiction as a symbolic state and support operations on contradictive statements.
- **principle of bivalence**: Touched on above, this states that 'a statement is either true or false'.  This is key to classical logic, and true, though less critical, for intuitionistic logic as well.  Logics that obey this principle are fairly limited in the kind of statement they can accommodate: for example phrases like 'this statement will be true tomorrow', or '50% of dogs bark frequently', cannot be managed in bivalent logics.

There is one axiom that is used in classical logic, and *not* in intuitionistic logic: the **law of excluded middle.**  This law states that 'either a proposition or its negation must be true'.
